

===== PAGE 1 =====
2006
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025
Physics-Informed Weakly-Supervised Learning for
Quality Prediction of Manufacturing Processes
Dhari F. Alenezi, Member, IEEE, Michael Biehler , Member, IEEE, Jianjun Shi , and Jing Li , Member, IEEE
Abstract— In manufacturing processes, a multitude of sensors
are typically deployed to collect data of process parameters.
While this provides an opportunity to better predict and control
the quality of the final product, the relationship between the
process variables and the desired final quality is often not well-
understood. To establish this relationship, machine learning (ML)
models can be used. However, collecting large, labeled datasets
to train the ML model can be difficult, as creating such datasets
typically involves costly or destructive end-of-line quality testing
of the products. To overcome this challenge, we propose a novel
framework called Physics-informed Weakly-supervised Learning
(PWL) that integrates physics-based models with data-driven
ML models. By leveraging physical knowledge and using the
outputs of physics-based models as weak labels, PWL offers
an alternative to traditional methods that require large, labeled
datasets. Our approach simultaneously optimizes the data-driven
ML model, as well as the discrepancy and calibration parameters
of the physics-based model, resulting in superior predictive
performance compared to either model used alone. We demon-
strate the effectiveness of PWL through simulation experiments,
comparisons with existing methods, and two real-world case
studies, highlighting its potential for improving quality prediction
in various manufacturing systems.
Note to Practitioners—The proposed method in this paper,
Physics-informed Weakly-supervised Learning (PWL), addresses
a common problem in manufacturing processes, where obtaining
large, labeled datasets can be costly or not always possible.
By integrating physics-based models with data-driven ML mod-
els, PWL leverages available physical knowledge to improve
the predictive performance of product quality in manufacturing
systems. This enables practitioners to better understand and
optimize their manufacturing processes even with limited labeled
datasets, leading to improved product quality and reduced
production costs.
Index Terms— Weakly-supervised learning, physics-informed
machine learning, manufacturing processes, quality prediction.
Manuscript
received
2
October
2023;
revised
4
January
2024;
accepted 2 March 2024. Date of publication 18 March 2024; date of
current version 31 January 2025. This article was recommended for
publication by Associate Editor N. Frigerio and Editor J. Li upon evaluation
of the reviewers’ comments. (Corresponding author: Jing Li.)
Dhari F. Alenezi is with the H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Sys-
tems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332 USA,
and also with the Department of Industrial and Management Systems Engi-
neering, Kuwait University, Safat 13060, Kuwait (e-mail: dhari@gatch.edu).
Michael Biehler, Jianjun Shi, and Jing Li are with the H. Milton Stew-
art School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332 USA (e-mail: michael.biehler@gatech.edu;
jianjun.shi@isye.gatech.edu; jing.li@isye.gatch.edu).
This
article
has
supplementary
downloadable
material
available
at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TASE.2024.3374098, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TASE.2024.3374098
I. INTRODUCTION
I
N MANUFACTURING processes, a multitude of sensors
are deployed to collect data of process parameters. This
provides an opportunity to better predict and control the
quality of the final product. However, the relationship between
the process variables and the desired final quality is often
not well understood. To establish this relationship, machine
learning (ML) models can be built based on historical datasets
which contain the final quality of each product (Y) and the
process variables involved in making the product (X), known
as labeled datasets. However, it can be challenging to obtain
the labels of products, which often involve comprehensive end-
of-line quality testing. This can be costly and often infeasible
for all products in the case of destructive testing techniques.
As a result, the labeled samples used to train ML models
are limited. This challenging situation is intensified by the
fact that industrial processes are inherently noisy. Without
sufficient data, it would be difficult to build robust models
and consequently model-based quality prediction would have
poor performance.
Recently, there has been some research interest in inte-
grating physics-based models with data-driven ML models to
improve the predictive performance [7], [11], [12], [18], [25],
[26], [32], [33], [37], [41], [43], [47], [49], [55]. Physics-based
models exploit known information from physical knowledge
to understand the behavior of a manufacturing process. Such
models are commonly implemented using either mathematical
equations or computer simulation, both based on physical laws
and principles. These models are often more cost-effective than
obtaining labeled samples via end-of-line quality testing.
Here we provide a motivating example for a spot-welding
process shown in Fig. 1. Destructive testing is still the most
common method to test spot weld properties with the two
most common testing methods being peel and chisel tests [52].
However, these methods are time-consuming, costly, and infea-
sible in continuous production. To avoid destroying samples,
physics-based models have been used to predict final quality
features related to the spot-welding process. For instance,
consider the case that the final quality we are interested in
predicting is temperature difference of the weld [1T ]. Process
variables in the welding process include force [kN], current
[kA], time of weld [s], and mass [g]. A physics-based model
will utilize mathematical formula from physics to produce a
prediction for the final quality, temperature difference. The
input of the mathematical formula includes some of the
1558-3783 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenyang Institute of Automation. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 08:28:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 2 =====
ALENEZI et al.: PHYSICS-INFORMED WEAKLY-SUPERVISED LEARNING FOR QUALITY PREDICTION
2007
Fig. 1.
Spot welding process.
process variables such as current, time of weld, and mass,
as well as parameters related to fundamental mechanical
principles such as elastic-plastic part deformation and thermal
expansion [56]. The output from the mathematical formula
is an estimate of the true temperature difference of the weld
[1T ].
Physics-based models can be utilized to provide an estimate
of the final quality of the product, which will mitigate the
shortage of labeled samples for building data-driven ML mod-
els. However, physics-based models have limitations. First,
it is typical that physics-based models can only take a small
number of process variables as input. Thus, there may be
a discrepancy between the output of physics-based models
and the product quality. Also, physics-based models need to
include some parameters related to the physical principles that
are not observable. To estimate the unobservable parameters,
a technique referred to as model calibration is needed [35].
However, the calibration process may be inadequate because
it often relies on oversimplified models and flawed assump-
tions, which can lead to inaccurate predictions [45]. Hence,
a physics-based model can be inexact in characterizing the
process-quality relationship, and thus may not be used as a
stand-alone model.
Integrating physics-based models with data-driven ML mod-
els presents several challenges:
1) Uncertainty in final quality estimates: Physics-based
models are often subject to various sources of uncer-
tainty, requiring model discrepancy to be addressed
before using the model.
2) Indirect measurement of final quality: The output of a
physics-based model may be highly correlated with the
final quality but may not directly measure it in some
cases.
3) Calibration issues: Physics-based models need to be cal-
ibrated, but calibration is often performed using ad-hoc
procedures rather than optimization.
Several studies in the literature have attempted to incorpo-
rate physics knowledge into their frameworks, yet none have
fully tackled the challenges mentioned earlier. Some involve
integrating physics knowledge into deep learning models [11],
[12], [18], [25], [32], [55], many of which find applications
in additive manufacturing [25], [32], [55]. For instance, one
method leverages dimensionality augmentation to incorporate
information derived from the selective laser melting process
into the model [55]. Other strategies for incorporating physics
knowledge into models include the use of physically-informed
priors [18], incorporating physics constraints within the loss
function [32], utilizing outputs from physics models as addi-
tional inputs [32], and pre-training with input-output data from
physics models [32]. Despite the innovative approaches, a per-
vasive issue remains: these strategies do not directly address
data scarcity, a significant concern given the data-intensive
nature of deep learning models [11], [12], [18], [25], [32],
[55]. Furthermore, they overlook the calibration challenges
associated with physics models. While some research has
attempted to tackle the calibration issue through a two-stage
approach [11], it remains isolated and not fully integrated with
the overall prediction process.
Another area of research involves integrating physics
knowledge through semi-supervised learning techniques. One
common approach is utilizing large databases of unlabeled
physics events and focusing on uncovering data patterns
and correlations to facilitate label spreading [41]. Another
approach focuses on utilizing simulations based on estab-
lished physical theories and principles to create a dataset
that improves training [7], [26], [37]. For example, Herrero-
Garcia et al. [26] pre-trained their model using simulations
from established physics theories to represent known physical
phenomena in dark matter, then trained on real experimental
data. Moreover, Chakravarti et al. [7] presented a method that
leverages a known physics model to generate a background
dataset and then uses a classifier to differentiate between this
background data and the experimental data. Semi-supervised
learning methodology shows promising results in addressing
data scarcity issues; however, these approaches heavily rely
on the quality and representativeness of the simulated data
from the physical model. Moreover, such approaches do not
address the challenges central to physics-based models, such
as uncertainty in final estimates and calibration issues.
To address the challenges, we draw upon ideas from the field
of weakly-supervised learning in ML [57]. Weakly-supervised
learning deals with scenarios where it is difficult to obtain a
large number of samples with precise labels to train an ML
model, but it is relatively easy to obtain unlabeled samples to
provide weak supervision for the ML model training. We con-
sider the output from physics-based models as providing weak
labels for samples. Driven by this idea, we propose a novel
framework for Physics-informed Weakly-supervised Learning
(PWL) in this paper. The novelties of PWL are summarized
as follows:
1) PWL utilizes a data-driven approach to handle the
uncertainty and inadequacy of physics-based models.
2) PWL utilizes the outputs of physics-based model as
weak labels, and integrates them with limited labeled
data collected from the manufacturing process.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenyang Institute of Automation. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 08:28:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 3 =====
2008
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025
3) PWL simultaneously optimizes the data-driven ML
model as well as the discrepancy and calibration param-
eters of the physics-based model, thus achieving a better
performance than each type of model used alone.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows: Section II
discusses related research and highlights the gaps in existing
work, providing motivation for the development of PWL.
Section III presents the model, algorithm, and theoretical
property of PWL. Section IV presents simulation experiments
and comparison of PWL with existing methods. Section V
provides two real-data case studies of manufacturing processes
to demonstrate the real-world applications of PWL. Finally,
Section VI provides the conclusion.
II. RELATED WORK
The model we are proposing has significant connections
with two established research fields: physics-informed ML
and weakly-supervised learning. This section will present a
summary of both research fields and highlight the unique
aspects of our work.
A. Physics-Informed ML
This research field aims to integrate physical laws, princi-
ples, and models with data-driven ML [51]. Due to the variety
of forms in which physics is represented in various application
domains, a diverse collection of methods is needed to develop
physics-informed ML models. These methods can be generally
divided into two categories: i) physics-informed architecture
ii) physics-informed regularization [40].
Physics-informed architecture is a recent research direction
that can make use of specific characteristics of the problem
being solved to implicitly encode physical consistency or other
desired physical properties in designing the ML model. This
area is focused largely on neural network architecture, due to
their modular and flexible nature that makes them a prime
candidate for architecture modification. For example, in lake
temperature modeling, Daw et al. [15] incorporated a physical
intermediate variable as part of a monotonicity-preserving
structure. Similarly, in the paper by Muralidlar et al. [42],
physics-constrained variables were inserted as the interme-
diate variables in the convolutional neural network (CNN)
architecture, which achieved significant improvement in pre-
dicting drag force on particle suspensions in moving fluids.
Other research focuses on designing computational graphs that
mimic the behavior of physics-based methods in preserving
energy conservation laws [13], [24], [39]. Despite the promis-
ing features of physics-informed architecture, formulating a
trainable architecture that represents the problem at hand is
a challenging task [25]. Moreover, even if an architecture is
successfully designed, it is often highly application-specific.
Hence, a new architecture needs to be formulated and trained
for any change in the initial application conditions.
Physics-informed regularization could integrate physical
understanding into the loss function of an ML model, which
helps generate results that are consistent with established
physical laws [30], [34], [48]. Pure data-driven ML can fail
to produce such results directly from data, especially when
provided with only limited samples. For instance, in the
context of lake temperature level modelling, one approach
was to include an extra physics-based penalty that guaranteed
predictions of denser water were at reduced depths than those
of much less thick water, which was a known monotonic
relationship [14]. Moreover, other approaches may attempt
to create a regularization term that accounted for the under-
lying physics by penalizing divergence form the governing
equations, such as Burgers’ equation [47]. However, physics-
informed regularization may not be feasible due to several
challenges [33]:
1) Mismatched input variables: Physics-informed regular-
ization may not be feasible if the physics-based model
and the ML model do not share the same input variables.
2) Limited generalizability: Regularization with limited
samples may restrict the model’s generalizability, lead-
ing to performance deterioration.
3) Incomplete or imprecise knowledge: It is essential to
recognize that the knowledge from physics-based mod-
els may be incomplete or imprecise.
4) Complexity of large-scale neural networks: Physics-
informed ML models often involve training large-scale
neural networks with complicated loss functions, which
can be highly non-convex optimization problems.
5) Competing loss function terms: The terms in the loss
function may compete with each other during training,
making the training process less robust and stable,
and potentially preventing convergence to the global
minimum.
An integration framework that is capable of integrating
incomplete/imprecise physical knowledge with ML is highly
desirable, which is the goal of this research.
B. Weakly-Supervised Learning
In ML, the models trained using only labelled samples are
known as supervised learning models. In many applications,
there may be samples that are not precisely labelled but can
still be useful to provide some “weak” supervision for the
ML model. This field is known as weakly-supervised learning.
Research in weakly-supervised learning can be categorized
based on the quality and characteristics of weakly labeled
data to three main fields: inexact supervision, inaccurate super-
vision, and incomplete supervision [57]. Inexact supervision
refers to situations where the labels or annotations provided
are incomplete or noisy, meaning that they do not fully capture
the desired concept or class [16], [21]. For example, in image
classification, an image might have multiple objects, but only
one object is labelled [10]. Inaccurate supervision, on the
other hand, refers to situations where the provided labels
or annotations are wrong. For example, an image of a dog
might be labeled as a cat [22]. In the case of incomplete
supervision, a portion of the training samples is labeled,
with the remainder being unlabeled. This presents unique
challenges as the algorithm must learn from both labeled
and unlabeled data, often requiring innovative approaches to
effectively leverage the unlabeled portion. Techniques like
semi-supervised learning [8], [59] and active learning [50] are
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenyang Institute of Automation. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 08:28:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 4 =====
ALENEZI et al.: PHYSICS-INFORMED WEAKLY-SUPERVISED LEARNING FOR QUALITY PREDICTION
2009
commonly employed under incomplete supervision, aiming
to maximize learning efficiency from limited labeled data.
Active learning operates under the assumption of having an
‘oracle’, like a human expert, who can provide labels for
chosen unlabeled samples. The objective of active learning
methods is to identify the most informative unlabeled samples
to send them to the ‘oracle’ for querying.
In the semi-supervised learning (SSL) approaches, the
dependency on an external ‘oracle’ for guidance is eliminated.
This approach combines the use of both labeled and unlabeled
data to enhance model training in areas such as classification
and prediction. Several SSL algorithms exist, with some based
on the concept that data naturally forms clusters, suggesting
that samples in the same cluster share similar class labels [8].
Graph-based learning, a key technique in SSL, involves cre-
ating graphs where nodes are training samples and edges
reflect their interrelations [4], [23]. Other strategies consider
the labels for unlabeled data as simply missing, operating
under the premise that all data, labeled or not, are derived from
a unified model [44]. Furthermore, certain SSL methods focus
on pinpointing boundaries in less densely populated data areas
while ensuring the accurate classification of labeled data [9],
[31], [38]. However, the field of SSL, while extensive, has
yet to fully explore incorporating physics-related information
from unlabeled samples into model building.
Moreover, recent work in weak supervision capitalizes on
domain knowledge to facilitate ranking unlabeled data sam-
ples, a strategy that has found considerable applicability in
healthcare settings [19]. Particularly, this methodology [19]
hinges on utilizing expert insights to generate relative rankings
based on anticipated reactions to treatments, such as medica-
tion effects in Parkinson’s disease management, thus providing
a binary label for a pair of unlabeled samples. However, this
strategy finds limited applicability in the manufacturing sector
because it lacks a parallel to the healthcare knowledge-driven
ranked samples. Also, the manufacturing domain, governed
rigidly by physical laws, demands a more structured and
quantifiable approach to data labeling derived from established
physical principles.
C. Gaps
The proposed PWL model integrates the output of the
physics-based model with data-driven ML, while at the same
time optimizing the physics-based model by estimating the
discrepancy and calibration parameters of the physics-based
model. In this way, the integration can be more effective.
In comparison, the existing works in physics-informed ML
integrate physical laws, principles, and models as they are,
without optimizing them. In the field of weakly-supervised
learning, none of the existing works consider weak supervision
from the physics-based model. In this sense, PWL is also
substantially different from the existing weakly-supervised
models in ML.
III. PHYSICS INFORMED WEAK LEARNING (PWL)
In this section, we will present the development of PWL.
Section III-A defines the problem setting and notations.
Section III-B proposes the model formulation. Section III-
C proposes an optimization problem for model estimation.
Section III-D presents the algorithm for solving the optimiza-
tion and the associated theoretical properties.
A. Notations and Problem Statement
Let
denote the output variable (i.e., product quality) of
a manufacturing process.
is typically affected by a set of
variables and parameters that are responsible for making the
final product. In practice, we are interested in predicting the
product quality
either empirically using a physics-based
model or a data-driven ML model.
1) Physics-Based Models and Limitations: Physics-based
models depend on physical understanding of the system’s input
and output, and characterize the relationship between the input
variables and the output variable as follows:
i = ϕ[η

x ph
i , θ

] + εdisc
i
+ εi,
(1)
where η(·, ·) : R(q1+q3)→Rz is the deterministic output from
a physics-based model, ϕ is a mapping function that maps
from the physics-based model output to the product quality,
εdisc
i
∈R is an unknown model discrepancy term between the
mapped physics-based model output and the product quality,
x ph
i
∈Rq1 are input variables to the physics-based model,
θ ∈Rq3 are calibration parameters which cannot be directly
controlled or measured in a real manufacturing process, such
as material properties, boundary conditions, etc., εi ∈R is an
random error, and i is the index for samples such as products
made by the manufacturing process.
Generally, physics-based models are a complex mathemat-
ical representation of the true system that are implemented
through a computer model or a physical equation. The mathe-
matical representation may not accurately emulate the process
observations mainly due to two reasons:
First, application of physics-based models is accompa-
nied by various sources of uncertainty. In our framework,
we address two sources of uncertainty that significantly affect
the performance of a physics-based model. The first source is
commonly referred to as model discrepancy. Model discrep-
ancy can be defined as the difference between the output of
the real-world manufacturing process such as product quality
and the output of the physics-based model at the same inputs’
values. Hence, even if we know the true values of all the
inputs required to generate an output from the physics-based
model, this output may not be equal to the true output
of the manufacturing process, thus creating a discrepancy
denoted by εdisc
i
in Eq. 1. This discrepancy exists because
of insufficient inputs. Physics-based models are built only on
input variables which have a well-understood relationship with
the model’s output based on physical knowledge. Hence, it is
likely that many variables in the manufacturing process cannot
be included in the physics-based models.
Second, physics-based models have unknown parameters
that need to be calibrated, denoted by θ in Eq. 1. Calibration
can be defined as the activity of adjusting θ until the output
of the physics-based model fits the observed data from the
real manufacturing process [35]. In practice, calibration is
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenyang Institute of Automation. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 08:28:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 5 =====
2010
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025
typically used as an ad-hoc fitting in a pre-step. The fitted
calibration parameter is substituted into the physics-based
model to generate an output. This sequential approach may
be sub-optimal due to inefficiencies in the two-step process,
potential overfitting during ad-hoc fitting, incomplete param-
eter optimization, and a lack of joint optimization between
the physics-based and ML models. An alternative approach
that integrates both models more effectively can lead to better
predictive performance and improved understanding of the
manufacturing process [47].
2) Data-Driven ML Models and Limitations: Due to the
advanced sensing capability of modern manufacturing sys-
tems, x ph are not the only measurable variables in the system.
Hence, we define another set of variables x pr ∈Rq2 which
represent measurable variables in a real system that are not
included in the physics-based model. This motivates another
modeling approach, data-driven models, to model the relation-
ship between all measured variables in the system and
as
follows:
i = f

x ph
i , x pr
i

+ εi,
(2)
where f ∈R(q1+q2)→R is an ML model to be trained based
on observational data.
In practice, the performance of data-driven models is hin-
dered by two main challenges. Firstly, the number of labeled
samples can be very limited, making the model training less
robust. Secondly, these models follow a pure data-driven
approach without taking physical knowledge into considera-
tion. In fact, we may consider physical knowledge to provide
a form of “virtual/synthetic data” to help mitigate the shortage
of labeled samples.
3) A Joint Model Perspective:
We seek to integrate
physics-based models and data-driven models in a unified
framework to leverage their complementary power. To further
highlight the significance of this approach, let us revisit
our motivating example, the spot-welding process: The prod-
uct quality variable y is weld temperature difference. The
physics-based model η(·, ·) is a mathematical equation that
utilizes principles of thermal resistivity and conductivity. The
inputs to the physics-based model, x ph, include the current
magnitude and time of the weld. The unknown calibration
parameters θ in the physics-based model include thermal
conductivity and resistivity coefficients. On the other hand,
there are other variables in the process that are not included
in x ph, i.e., x pr which includes the force magnitude. A data-
driven model can be built based on x ph and x pr. It can be seen
that neither model is sufficient by itself to produce an adequate
predictive performance, because they neglect the fact that
is jointly influenced by the three sets of variables as follows:
i = u

x ph
i , x pr
i , θ

+ εi,
(3)
where u(·, ·, ·) : R(q1+q2+q3)→R is the underlying unknown
true process-quality relationship.
Models that are developed without taking Eq. 3 into consid-
eration will lead to suboptimal solutions. PWL focuses mainly
on the improvement and integration of the two modeling
approaches, physics-based models and data-driven models,
while respecting the assumption in Eq. 3.
B. Joint Model Formulation
It is difficult to directly formulate a joint model as in Eq.
3. We propose the following formulation:
i = H

x ph
i , θ

g + B

x pr
i , x ph
i

d+ εi,
(4)
where H : Rq1+q3 →Rp are basis functions for creating
patterns associated with x ph
i
and θ, g ∈Rp are coefficients
vectors associated with the patterns created by H; B
:
Rq1+q2 →Rb are basis functions for creating patterns asso-
ciated with x pr
i
and x ph
i , d ∈Rb are coefficients vectors
associated with the patterns created by B. The basis matrix
formed by H and B are used to represent patterns in the
original feature matrix, and the coefficients g and d are
estimated based on the patterns in H and B, respectively.
By using basis, the objective function aims to identify the
most important patterns in the data for predicting the response
variable such as product quality.
The structure of the model proposed in Eq. 4 offers three
significant advantages. First, the model is structured in a way
that it allows the first term to have the same input as the
physics-based model to allow knowledge distillation. Knowl-
edge distillation [29] is a technique used in ML to transfer
knowledge from a larger, more complex model (known as
the teacher model) to a smaller, simpler model (known as the
student model). This will help address labeled data shortage
by allowing the model to additionally learn from the abundant
weakly labeled samples produced by the physics-based model
η(·, ·). Second, the second term helps mitigate the discrepancy
of using the physics-based model alone. Since this term is
built upon both x ph and x pr, it can leverage the data-driven
model. Overall, the model in Eq. 4 combines physics-based
and data-driven models together. Third, this is a highly flex-
ible framework that can accommodate various types of basis
functions. By choosing different basis functions, the model can
be tailored to specific problem settings, allowing it to capture
diverse patterns and relationships in the data. This adaptability
makes the proposed framework suitable for a wide range of
applications in manufacturing and other domains.
Notably, in the model in Eq. 4, the calibration parameters
θ are integrated with the model formulation, which makes it
possible to optimize θ together with other model parameters,
instead of making calibration a pre-step.
C. Optimization
In order to estimate the model parameters and calibration
parameters for the model in Eq. 4, we propose the following
optimization:
min
g,θ,d
Xn
i=1

i −H

x ph
i , θ

g −B

x pr
i , x ph
i

d

2
F
+ λ1
XN
j=1
H

x ph
j , θ

g−ϕ[η

x ph
j , θ

]

2
F
+ λ2∥g∥1 + λ3
X(q1+q3)
q=1
gq

2
s.t.
ωl ≤θ ≤ωu,
(5)
where ωl ∈Rq3 and ωu ∈Rq3 are lower and upper bounds
of the calibration parameters θ. N is the number of samples
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenyang Institute of Automation. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 08:28:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 6 =====
ALENEZI et al.: PHYSICS-INFORMED WEAKLY-SUPERVISED LEARNING FOR QUALITY PREDICTION
2011
generated by the physics-based model, while n is the number
of labeled samples collected from the manufacturing system.
N is generally much larger than n. Next, we explain the
purpose of each term in Eq. 5:
1) The first term comes from Eq. 4, which aims to minimize
the prediction error on the product quality variable,
which is the overall goal of the framework.
2) The second term has two purposes. The first purpose is
to regularize how much the H

x ph
i , θ

g learns from the
physics-based model η(·, ·). The amount of regulariza-
tion is dependent on the accuracy of the physics-based
model. If the physics-based model is inaccurate, reg-
ularization should be relatively weak, which can be
realized by a smaller λ1. The second purpose is to handle
the mismatch between the quality variable
i and the
physics-based model output η(·, ·). That is, they can be
highly correlated but not necessarily measure the same
thing. Hence, we introduced the ϕ function.
3) The third term is the L1 penalty, which encourages
sparsity at the individual coefficient level by applying an
L1 norm penalty to all the coefficients in g. This penalty
term helps to identify the most important individual
variables for predicting the outcome.
4) The fourth term is a group lasso penalty, which encour-
ages group sparsity by applying an L2 norm penalty
to each group of coefficients gq separately and then
summing over all the groups. This penalty term helps
to identify the most important groups of variables for
predicting the outcome.
5) Together, the third and fourth terms form a combina-
tion of group selection and variable selection methods,
known as the sparse group lasso. The parameters λ2
and λ3 control the trade-off between group sparsity and
individual sparsity, respectively. This is required since
we are generating patterns related to the x ph
i
and θ using
the basis function H. Some of those patterns are related
to the same phenomena, and hence we desire their
effects to be chosen or unchosen together. Moreover, the
patterns generated by H are not necessarily independent,
and hence this penalty can help with identifiability issues
in our model which will be discussed in more details in
Section III-D3.
The optimization model in Eq. 5 jointly optimizes the
physics-based model and data-driven model to achieve better
predictive performance. Also, the model optimizes the calibra-
tion parameters θ in the physics-based model in the integrated
framework. The proposed model in Eq. 5 is clearly non-convex
and highly complicated to optimize. The algorithms devel-
oped to optimize the model will be discussed in detail in
Section III-D.
D. Algorithm
The problem in Eq. 5 is not convex. However, it can
be solved through a Blockwise Coordinate Descent (BCD)
algorithm, where we iteratively update the g, θ, and d as
shown in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 The PWL algorithm
Input: H(., .), B(., .), ϕ(.), ε0
Initialize: d = d0, θ = θ 0
While (
h
i −

H

x ph
i , θ

g −B

x pr
i , x ph
i

d
i2
≥ε0)
1)
Update g According to ADMM Algorithm (Section III-D1.)
2)
Update d as:
min
d
Pn
i=1
yi −H

x ph
i , θ

g −B

x pr
i , x ph
i

d

2
F
3)
Update θ according to ADMM algorithm (Section III-D2.)
End
Even though the problem in Eq. 5 is not convex, the three
updates in Algorithm 1 are convex. In the PWL algorithm,
there are two intuitive considerations about the initialization.
First, we want to initialize d using small values to allow g
to learn from the physics-based model in the first update.
Second, we want to initialize θ to give the best possible
performance of the physics-based model η(·, ·); hence it will
be initialized according to our physics-based model calibration
approach that to be discussed in Section IV. The d update has
a close-form solution since we can cast it as a least square
problem. On the other hand, the g and θ updates are not
as simple and will be discussed in detail in Sections III-D1.
and III-D2, respectively. Lastly, we will discuss properties
of our algorithm related to identifiability and uniqueness in
Section III-D3.
1) The g Update: In the g update, the problem in Eq. 5
reduces to solving the following problem:
min
g
Xn
i=1

i −H

x ph
i , θ

g −B

x pr
i , x ph
i

d

2
F
+ λ1
XN
j=1
H

x ph
j , θ

g−ϕ[η

x ph
j , θ

]

2
F
+ λ2∥g∥1 + λ3
X(q1+q3)
q=1
gq

2.
(6)
The
problem
in
Eq.
6
is
a
sum
of
convex
func-
tions and hence convex. Assuming the basis functions
H

x ph
i , θ

, B

x pr
i , x ph
i

and
H

x ph
i , θ

were selected,
to facilitate the estimation procedure, we represent them in
the matrix form as H1 ∈Rn×p, B1 ∈Rn×b and H2 ∈RN×p,
respectively. The problem in Eq. 6 is reformulated as follows:
min
z
M
X
m=1
fm(z),
(7)
where
M = 4, f1(g) = ∥Y −H1 g−B1d∥2
F, f2(g)
= λ1
H2 g−˜η]
2
F, f3(g)
= λ2∥g∥1, f4(g) = λ3
X(q1+q3)
q=1
gq

2, ˜η
=


ϕ[η

x ph
1 , θ

]
...
ϕ[η

x ph
N , θ

]

, Y =


y1
...
yn

.
An effective and efficient algorithm to solve the problem in
Eq. 7 can be developed using the Alternating Direction Method
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenyang Institute of Automation. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 08:28:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 7 =====
2012
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025
Algorithm 2 The ADMM consensus algorithm
Input: step size 1,ϵ
Initialize: replicates z(0)
m
= 0, u(0)
m
= 0,¯z = 0, for m =
1, . . . , M, of the same shape as z.
For k = 1, 2, . . . do
Update z(k)
m = prox1fm
h
¯z(k−1) −u(k−1)
m
i
, for
m = 1, . . . , M, in parallel.
¯z(k) =
M
P
m=1
z(k)
m
M
u(k)
m = u(k−1)
m
+ z(k)
m −¯z(k)
If
¯z(k) −¯z(k−1) < ϵ
Stop
End
End
of Multipliers (ADMM) consensus algorithm [46], summa-
rized in Algorithm 2 below. In order to apply the ADMM
consensus algorithm to this problem, we first derive the
proximal operator for the objective function, which involves
computing the optimal solution for each variable while keeping
the other variables fixed. The proximal operator is a key
component in the ADMM framework and is crucial for the
convergence and stability of the algorithm. By incorporating
the proximal operator into the ADMM consensus algorithm,
we can efficiently solve the optimization problem in Eq. 7
while ensuring a robust and stable solution.
Even To implement Algorithm 2 in solving Eq. 7, we need
to evaluate the proximal operators of 1f1, . . . 1fM. The results
are in Proposition 1, and the derivation is in Section A. in in
the supplementary materials.
Proposition 1: Let f1(g) = ∥Y−H1 g−B1d∥2
F, f2(g) =
λ1
H2 g−˜η]
2
F, f3(g)
=
λ2∥g∥1, and f4(g)
=
λ3
P(q1+q3)
q=1
gq

2. The proximal operators of 1f1, . . . 1f4 are
given as follows: Let z and a have the same size as g.
1) If z = prox1f1[a], we have
prox1f1[a] =
 I + 1H⊤
1 H1
−1 a +1 H⊤
1 (Y −B1d)

,
where I is the identity matrix of order p.
2) If z = prox1f2[a], we have
prox1f2[a]
=
 I+λ11H⊤
2 H2
−1 a + λ11H⊤
2 ˜η

,
where I is the identity matrix of order p.
3) If z = prox1f3[a], we have
prox1f3[a] = Sλ21(a) =



a−λ2 1, a > λ21
0, −λ2 1 ≤a ≤λ21
a+λ2 1, a ≤λ21.
4) If z = prox1f4[a], we have
prox1f4[a] =

1−λ31
∥a∥2

+
a.
2) The θ Update: In the θ update, the problem in Eq. 5
reduces to solving the following problem:
min
θ
Xn
i=1

i −H

x ph
i , θ

g −B

x pr
i , x ph
i

d

2
F
+ λ1
XN
j=1
H

x ph
j , θ

g−ϕ[η

x ph
j , θ

]

2
F
s.t.
ωL ≤θ ≤ωU.
(8)
The problem in Eq. 8 is a sum of convex functions
under a convex constraint and hence convex. We can uti-
lize Algorithm 2 to solve it, with M = 3 and f1(g) =
∥Y −H1 g−B1d∥2
F, f2(g)
=
λ1
H2 g−˜η]
2
F, f3(g)
=
q3P
k=1
IωLk ≤θk≤ωLk . The proximal operators of the functions
that are given in Proposition 2. The derivation is given in
Section B. in the supplementary materials.
Proposition 2: Let f1(g) = ∥Y −H1 g−B1d∥2
F, f2(g) =
λ1
H2 g−˜η]
2
Fand f3(g)
=
q3P
k=1
IωLk ≤θk≤ωUk .
The
prox-
imal
operators
of
1f1, . . . 1f3
are
given
as
follows:
Let z and a have the same size as θ.
1) If z = prox1f1[a], we have
2) prox1f1[a]
=
 I + 1gg⊤−1 a +1 g(Y −B1d)⊤
,
where I is the identity matrix of order p.
3) If z = prox1f2[a], we have
4) prox1f2[a] =
 I+λ11gg⊤−1 a + λ11g ˜η⊤
, where I
is the identity matrix of order p.
5) If z = prox1f3[a], we have
zk = prox1f3[ak] = max

ωLk, min

ak, ωUk
		
.
3) 3. Identifiability and Uniqueness: Another aspect of our
algorithm that needs to be discussed is identifiability issues
that may arise in evaluating terms on the form H1g appearing
in Eq. 7 for instance. This problem can be casted as a dictio-
nary learning problem since we are in some sense trying to
learn a basis matrix, H1, and a sparse coefficints vector, g, The
dictionary learning method does not assume that the patterns in
H1 to be orthogonal like principal component analysis, and
the reconstructed signal is often evaluated accurately under
mild conditions. However, this does not guarantee that dictio-
nary learning can uniquely recover sparse data from samples.
In other words, the uniqueness of the learned basis and sparse
coefficients vector is not always guaranteed, which may create
an identifiability issue. The detailed statistical assumptions
that guarantee the identifiability is stated in proposition 3 and
further discussed in Section C. in the supplementary materials.
Proposition 3:
Suppose g is a vector with at most k ≪
m nonzero entries, called k-sparse. Assume the basis H is
spark on the vectors g such that:
H g1 = H g2 f or g1, g2 ∈Rm ⇒g1 = g2
Assuming H is given, and our signal is constructed such
that
˜Y = Hg,
where ˜Y = Y−B1d, a lower bound can be set on the number
of samples, n, of ˜Y that guarantees unique recovery of sparse
vector g from a signal ˜Y with a given basis matrix A such
that:
n ≥Ck log
m
k

,
where C is a constant independent of m, n, and k.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenyang Institute of Automation. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 08:28:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 8 =====
ALENEZI et al.: PHYSICS-INFORMED WEAKLY-SUPERVISED LEARNING FOR QUALITY PREDICTION
2013
In the case H is unknown, assuming the above holds,
we assume we can subsample N similar samples of ˜Y from
our system such that we have ˘Y = { ˜Y 1, . . . , ˜Y N. Then, the
uniqueness of both g and H can be ensured if we establish
a lower bound on the required number of subsamples, N, for
the uniqueness of A with a probability of (1 −β) as follows:
N = k + 1
β
 m
k

.
The formula above implies that if the number of subsamples
is sufficiently large, as specified in Proposition 3, the sparse
matrix factorization of the basis matrix will be unique. For
further discussion and proofs on the identifiability, readers are
referred to [1].
IV. SIMULATION STUDIES
This section of the paper utilizes simulated data to explore
and measure the capabilities and efficiency of our model.
We have structured our simulation experiments, presented
from sections IV to IV-B, with the aim of resolving the
questions below:
1) How well does PWL perform under different sample
sizes of the labeled data (Section IV)?
2) How does the accuracy of the physics-based model affect
PWL performance (Section IV)?
3) How many labeled samples can be conserved through
integrating samples generated from the physics-based
model (Section IV-A)?
Data Generation: The process for generating data is uni-
form across all experiments, but the specific values of the
parameters can vary. The process of generating simulated
data begins with sampling the input variables

x pr
i , x ph
i

from a multivariate normal distribution, i.e.,

x pr
i , x ph
i

∼
M N(0, 6x), where 6x is the covariance matrix. The cali-
bration parameters are sampled from a uniform distribution,
θ ∈(0, 1]. Then, we adopt the synthetic toy example from
Bastos and O’Hagan [2] with some modification to simulate
the output variable as follows:
i = ηtrue

x ph
i , θ

+h
 x pr
i

+
εi, where ηtrue(., .) is the physics-based model, h(.) is a
function of the process variables not included in the physics-
based model, and εi is sampled from N(0, σ 2
ε ). σ 2
ε is the
noise variance based on the selected signal-to-noise ratio
SN R =
Var( )
σ 2ε
. We assume in our simulation that we cannot
observe ηtrue(., .) but a less accurate version of it as follows:
η

x ph
i , θ

= ηtrue

x ph
i , θ

+ δ

x ph
i

+ εη, where, δ(.) is
a function that simulates the discrepancy of the physics-
based model, and εη is uncertainty in the physics-based model
sampled from N(0, σ 2
εη). In our simulations, the SNR is fixed
at five, q1 to three, q2 to two, and q3 to two. The functional
forms for our models in the simulation are chosen as follows:
ηtrue

x ph
i , θ

=

1 −exp

−1
2x3

× 10θ1x3
1 + 19x1 + 60
9θ2x3
2 + 4x2 + 20
(9)
δ

x ph
i

= 10x2
1 + 4x2
2 + 2x3
3
50x1x2 + 10
(10)
h
 x pr
i

= 4x2
4 + 8x2
5
5x4x5
(11)
Models Under Comparison: We compare PWL with a
variety of supervised learning models in ML, which can
only use labeled samples in training and cannot incorporate
the physics-based model as PWL. The following models are
compared against in the simulations:
• Ridge regression (RR) as representative of linear regres-
sion (LR) models, it uses quadratic loss and a squared L2
regularization for the model’s coefficients.
• Support vector regression (SVR) as representative of
kernel learning methods. The kernel type selected is a
polynomial kernel function which produced best results
on our simulated dataset.
• Decision tree (DT) as representative of is a tree-based
nonparametric supervised learning method. The max-
imum depth was selected based on prior research
findings [4], [10] and best performance was selected in
every experiment.
• Random forests (RF) as representative of ensemble
methods and gradient boosted decision trees (GBDT)
are typical choice in this case. For the hyperparameter
settings, the number of boosting stages was selected from
[30, 100, 160], learning rate was selected from [0.1, 0.15,
0.2], and the maximum depth was selected based on prior
research findings [4], [6], [8], and the best performing
parameters were selected in every experiment.
• Gaussian process regression (GP) as representative of
nonparametric, Bayesian approaches. A squared exponen-
tial kernel showed best performance on our dataset.
• Physics-based model (Physics) as representative of
physics-based models. The model is calibrated using a
two-step procedure. First, calibration parameters were
obtained through least-squares estimation as follows:
ˆθ = arg
min
θε[ωLωU]
n
X
i=1
h
i −f
h
η

x ph
i , θ
ii2
(12)
Then, the model discrepancy was estimated using a gaussian
process model similar to the approach described in Kennedy
and O’Hagan [35] to achieve best performance.
Performance Metrics: To verify the effectiveness of the
proposed method, three commonly used metrics in regression
task are employed in this work, i.e., MSE, RMSE, and MAE.
Besides, the mean values and the standard deviations are
obtained by independent experiments with different random
seeds to ensure the experiments reliability.
A. Model Performance With Varying Sample Sizes
The objective of this experiment is to assess and contrast
the effectiveness of models using varying samples size. Twelve
unique scenarios are constructed, beginning with a scenario of
only 10 labeled samples, and progressively adding 10 more
labeled samples in each subsequent scenario. This increment
continues until the final scenario, which encompasses a total
of 120 labeled samples. On the other hand, we assume in
each scenario that there are 100 samples generated from
the physics-based model η(·, ·). In each of these scenarios,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenyang Institute of Automation. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 08:28:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 9 =====
2014
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025
Fig. 2.
Average test RMSE across all models.
we allocate 70% of the labeled samples for the training
process and use the remaining 30% for validation. We also
produce a separate test set with 200 labeled samples, which is
employed to assess and compare the predictive performance
across different models.
In each scenario, PWL is trained based on both the labeled
samples and the samples generated from the physics-based
model. For PWL, the three tuning parameters are determined
by achieving the lowest MSE on the validation set. A similar
approach is applied for tuning the parameters of other models,
focusing on minimizing the MSE during validation. This
training, validation, and testing process is repeated 20 times
randomly for each model, with recoding both the average and
standard deviation of their performance metrics. In Figure 2,
it is evident that PWL consistently outperforms its counterparts
in terms of average RMSE. To evaluate the statistical sig-
nificance of this performance disparity, one-sided hypothesis
tests are performed comparing PWL against each competing
model. The results indicate that PWL’s performance metrics
are significantly better across all scenarios compared to the
metrics of competing models.
Table I shows the detailed performance of three of our
scenarios representing low, medium, and high labeled data
availability in training. Moreover, the comparison between
PWL and its competing models reveals that the largest per-
formance gap is observed in cases with a limited number of
labeled samples. This shows the advantage of PWL due to its
capability of incorporating knowledge from the physics-based
model to compensate for the shortage of labeled samples
in training. Moreover, by comparing PWL with the physics-
based model, we can observe that, regardless of increasing
the number of training samples in training, the physics-based
model exhibits a limit in its performance, due to the less
flexible structure of the physics-based model.
Moreover, for a more comprehensive assessment that
includes performance stability, Figure 3. features a boxplot
analysis of the MSE in each scenario for PWL versus the best
performance of the competing models. This analysis highlights
a more rapid decrease in both the mean and the spread of
MSE values for PWL. Additionally, the comparison reveals
that the competing model exhibits greater fluctuations in both
TABLE I
ALL MODELS’ PERFORMANCE METRICS ON TEST DATA FOR THREE
SELECTED SCENARIOS
Fig. 3.
Boxplots of MSE for PWL vs. best competing model.
variance and mean, suggesting that its performance is less
robust compared to PWL.
B. Model Performance Under Different Physics-Based Model
Accuracies
The findings in the previous section showed that PWL can
help improve performance under a limited number of labeled
samples compared with competing models. The improvement
is achieved by incorporating physical knowledge in training,
which can help mitigate the shortage of labeled samples.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenyang Institute of Automation. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 08:28:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 10 =====
ALENEZI et al.: PHYSICS-INFORMED WEAKLY-SUPERVISED LEARNING FOR QUALITY PREDICTION
2015
TABLE II
PWL PERFORMANCE UNDER DIFFERENT PHYSICS-BASED MODEL ACCU-
RACIES VS. COMPETING MODELS
This result leads to the question regarding how much the
performance will be affected by the inaccuracy of the physics-
based model.
To answer this question, we focus in this experiment on
the physics-based model η(·, ·) used in PWL. We use Pear-
son correlation between the label yi and the output of the
physics-based model η(·, ·) as a metric for the accuracy of
the physics-based model. The correlation will be controlled
through varying the magnitude of the discrepancy function
δ

x ph
i

. We create three different scenarios over which the
physics-based model accuracy will vary, including a highly
accurate model (i.e., scenario 1) with a correlation of 0.85,
a mildly accurate model (i.e., scenario 2) with a correlation
of 0.7, and an insufficiently accurate model (i.e., scenario
3) with a correlation of 0.5. All scenarios are based on
40 labeled samples and 100 samples generated from the
physics-based model η(·, ·). Table II shows the performance
metrics of the experiments. We can see that the accuracy of the
physics-based model significantly affects PWL performance
with the best performance achieved with the highly accurate
physics-based model (i.e., PWL-H). However, one important
observation is that the performance of PWL with insufficiently
accurate physics-based model (i.e., PWL-L) is statistically
undisguisable from the best performance achieved by compet-
ing methods. This indicates that even when the physics-based
model is not sufficiently accurate, we can expect that the
performance of PWL is still comparable to competing methods
that only include labeled samples in training. This result is due
to the fact that PWL utilizes a tunning λ1 to control how much
the physics-based model should be emphasized in the training
process.
C. Saving of Labeled Samples Using PWL
The previous experiments showed that PWL can be very
helpful when the labeled samples are limited, compared with
models that rely only on the labeled samples. Hence, it is
desirable to learn how many labeled samples can be saved by
adopting PWL in order to achieve the same performance as
other models. To answer this question, we focus on scenario
3 in Section IV-A, in which PWL achieved an average MSE
of 3.745 with a training set of 30 labeled samples and
Fig. 4.
MSE performance of competing models with increasing labeled
sample size.
100 samples from the physics-based model. To determine how
many extra labeled samples are required for the competing
models to achieve the same MSE as PWL, the number of
labeled samples is varied incrementally from 30 to 110 with
10 sample increments. Under each sample size, all competing
models are trained and only the top-performing model’s results
are record. Figure 4 shows the MSE of best competing model
(red curve) in comparison with PWL (blue curve).
We can observe that the MSE of competing models drops
to be lower than that of PWL with 110 labeled samples
in training. We conduct one-sided hypothesis testing to see
when the performance of competing models has statistically
equivalent MSE to PWL. The result shows that statistical
equivalence is achieved when 100 samples are included in
training. This indicates that an increment of 233.3% in labeled
samples is required by the competing models to achieve
the same performance of PWL. Hence, the benefit of PWL
in situations of costly data collection is substantial.
V. CASE STUDIES
In this section, we will present the application of PWL in
two real datasets.
A. Temperature Difference Prediction in Spot Welding
In spot welding, high temperature difference usually results
in a poor-quality weld. The objective of this study is to accu-
rately predict temperature increase using process variables.
To validate our proposed PWL framework, we conducted
extensive spot-welding experiments using an Electric X-type
Welding Gun with a 75-kVA capacity and 50Hz frequency.
During welding, in-line measurements of voltage, current, and
pressure variations were recorded. The nugget formation and
temperature of the welding zone were monitored using an
infrared camera (TACHYON 1024 µCAMERA). Spherical tip
electrodes made of CuCrZr alloy conforming to DIN 44750,
Part 1, were used, and the electrode tips were replaced every
5 welds to avoid alloying and eliminate potential deformations.
The electrodes had a ball radius of 75mm and a diameter
of 20mm. For the workpieces, we used uncoated steel plates
commonly used in the automotive industry, specifically low
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenyang Institute of Automation. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 08:28:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 11 =====
2016
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025
carbon EED quality steel (St1203 according to DIN1623), cut
into 20 × 40-mm pieces with a thickness varying between
1 and 3mm. To prepare the specimens, the front face of each
welded pair was ground flat with a file and finished with a
600x abrasive.
There are four controllable variables in the welding process:
force [kN] (x1), current [kA] (x2), time of weld [s] (x3),
mass [g] (x4), and the objective is to predict the temperature
difference on a part [1T ]( ) given input setting. The time of
weld represents the length of time during which the welding
process is actively conducted on the workpiece. Process data
are obtained from 35 welding experiments we conducted
using a Latin Hypercube design over the range of controllable
parameters. The physics-based model η(., .) is represented by
a mathematical equation that has a set of input variables that
are different from the experiment as follows:
1T = I 2 · ρ · L · t
A · m · C p
,
(13)
where
I: current [kA],
t: time of weld [s],
m: mass [g],
ρ : Resistivity [ohm/m],
C p : thermal conductivity [W/mK],
L: Length of path [m],
A: Cross sectional area [m].
We can observe that the physics-based model includes
three of the controllable variables from our process setting
(i.e., x2, x3, x4), which we refer to in PWL as x ph, and
the variables that are only included in the process setting
(i.e., x1) are referred to as x pr. On the other hand, there
are some parameters that are only included in the physics-
based model, which PWL refers to as θ. We calibrate the
physics-based model to our process samples according to the
two-step procedure we described in Eq. 12. The physics-based
model shows a good correlation with our process samples of
0.884, however a poor predictive performance with RMSE of
72.8. This type of physics-based model represents a desirable
candidate for our PWL framework. In the first experiment,
we will compare PWL performance with the benchmarking
methods described in Section IV. We will use the 35 available
samples and 35 samples from the physics equation using the
same variable setting in process, and report the 5-fold cross
validation mean and standard deviation performance of RMSE,
MSE, and MAE from 5 random runs. Table III shows the
performance recorded in our experiment. PWL performance
in all metrics is superior to competing models. PWL not
only has the smallest mean in all metrics, but also shows
good robustness with small standard deviation compared to
competing models.
To assess the impact of excluding variables such as
force, we can compare the performance of the standalone
physics-based model against that of the comprehensive PWL
model, as shown in Table III. This comparison not only
underscores the limitations of the physics-based model when
used in isolation but also demonstrates the improved accuracy
and reliability achieved through its seamless integration with
TABLE III
PWL PERFORMANCE VS. COMPETING MODELS ON CASE STUDY A
TABLE IV
PWL PERFORMANCE VS. SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING MODELS ON
CASE STUDY A
machine learning. Such an analysis provides valuable insights
into the roles of missing variables in the physics-based model
and the overall effectiveness of our PWL approach, thereby
offering a more holistic understanding of temperature differ-
ences in spot welding.
Another aspect of PWL that we want to explore particularly
in this case study is the performance under limited labeled data
availability. The number of labeled samples provided in this
case study is 35, which is considered a small number to fully
understand predictors-response relationship. This phenomenon
is very common especially in experiments that require the sam-
ple to be destroyed in some process setting to get a response
reading. Hence, a model such as PWL that requires only a
few labeled samples and is able to exploit unlabeled samples
is highly desirable in this setting. Therefore, we will compare
PWL performance with models that can utilize labeled and
unlabeled samples in training such as semi-supervised learning
models. The models to be compared with are CoReg [58],
ICT [54], 5 Model [36], and Mean Teacher [53]. Among the
35 labeled samples, we will consider only 15 to be labeled and
the rest as unlabeled. We conducted 5 random runs and the
performance on the unlabeled samples is reported in Table IV.
We can observe in Table IV that PWL performance is
superior in mean RMSE, MSE and MAE over all competing
models. PWL also shows a smaller standard deviation in all
of the three metrics in Table IV, which indicates a more
stable performance. Based on the observations in Tables III
and IV, semi-supervised models demonstrated statistically
significant superior performance compared to certain fully
supervised models, particularly GBDT and DT. This outcome
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenyang Institute of Automation. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 08:28:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 12 =====
ALENEZI et al.: PHYSICS-INFORMED WEAKLY-SUPERVISED LEARNING FOR QUALITY PREDICTION
2017
TABLE V
PWL PERFORMANCE VS. COMPETING MODELS ON CASE STUDY B
is often observed in scenarios with limited data availability.
Semi-supervised models excel by utilizing both labeled and
unlabeled data, thereby providing a more holistic understand-
ing of the dataset than fully supervised models, which rely
exclusively on labeled data. In contrast, fully supervised
models such as GBDT and DT are more prone to overfitting
when faced with a data-limited situations.
B. Nugget Diameter Prediction in Spot Welding
In this section, we consider the spot-welding experiment
given in [3] and [27]. There are three variables in this
TABLE VI
PWL PERFORMANCE VS. SEMI-SUPERVISED LEARNING MODELS ON
CASE STUDY B
process: load (x1), current (x2), and gage (x3), and the
objective is to optimize the nugget diameter of the weld
(y). The physics-based model is quite complex and contains
one calibration parameter (θ) additional to the three vari-
ables in the process. The physics-based model uses coupled
partial differential equations to represent thermal, electrical,
and mechanical interactions, implemented via the ANSYS
commercial code, as detailed in [3].
The first step is to approximate the physics-based model.
Because there is no random error in the physics-based com-
puter simulation model, an interpolating model such as kriging
is suitable for the model approximation [49]. We fit an
ordinary kriging model with Gaussian correlation function
using the 35 simulations in Table III of [3]. Afterwards, the
produced physics-based model is calibrated to the process
samples described in Table IV of [3] according to the two-step
procedure we described in Eq. 12. The process samples in [3]
represent 12 experimental settings with 10 replicates per
setting. In this case study, we obtained more process samples,
120 in total, than the previous case study. Thus, we are able
to test PWL performance under low and high data availability
scenarios. We will compare two scenarios, one with only
10 labeled process samples in training and the other with
100 process samples in training. The remaining samples are
used for testing, and we will conduct five random splits to
report the mean and the standard deviation of RMSE, MSE,
and MAE.
Table V shows PWL performance compared to benchmarks
under the two data availability scenarios. Generally, the best
MSE value should be the closest to the variance of noise
in data which was estimated to be 0.2 from the replicates.
PWL achieved this desired MSE performance with a value of
0.206 under the scenario with 100 labeled samples in training.
We can also observe that PWL outperforms the benchmarking
methods in all performance metrics under the scenario of
limited data availability.
In the results in Table VI, the PWL model consistently
outperforms other models for both 10 and 100 labeled samples,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenyang Institute of Automation. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 08:28:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 13 =====
2018
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUTOMATION SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING, VOL. 22, 2025
showcasing superior average performance and greater consis-
tency across different runs as indicated by its low standard
deviations. Among the semi-supervised models, their perfor-
mances are relatively close, especially with a smaller labeled
dataset which suggests comparable benefits in their strategies
of leveraging unlabeled data. Furthermore, the performance of
PWL improves more significantly with the increase in labeled
samples compared to the other methods. This indicates that
PWL is effective at utilizing unlabeled data and scales well
with more labeled data.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduce a novel methodology to enhance
ML model performance in manufacturing processes utilizing
the weak supervision paradigm. Traditional methods relying
on expensive, time-consuming labeled datasets have limi-
tations, which we overcome by integrating partial physical
knowledge, significantly improving model performance. Our
approach is validated by comprehensive simulations and two
case studies, demonstrating robustness across various noise
levels and numbers of labeled samples, while also highlighting
the immense potential of our proposed method in diverse
manufacturing processes.
Methodologically, our approach offers several advantages,
including substantial improvements in predictive performance
and efficient optimization via the ADMM algorithm. This
paper establishes that weak supervision is a promising alter-
native to conventional approaches for enhancing the accuracy
of ML models in manufacturing processes, especially when
labeled datasets are either unavailable or prohibitively expen-
sive to acquire.
In summary, our methodology holds the potential to reduce
costs, increase efficiency, and improve in-process quality in
manufacturing processes. The findings of this study open up
exciting new directions for future research. A direct extension
could involve adapting our flexible PWL model to manage
more complex or higher-dimensional outputs, while addressing
the new challenges that such outputs may present. Further-
more, our framework could be expanded to tackle intrinsic
uncertainties in some physics-based models. For instances
where the output variable is within a known range at a
given confidence, the PWL framework might be adapted
by integrating techniques like weighted loss functions, soft
constraints on predictions, and probabilistic outputs, though
these enhancements may add complexity to optimization.
Researchers can also explore our approach’s applicability in
other fields with scarce labeled data, such as non-destructive
testing or predictive maintenance. There is also potential for
integrating our framework with advanced machine learning
techniques such as deep learning and reinforcement learning
to improve predictive performance; or with weak supervision
methods like crowdsourcing or semi-supervised learning to
build robust models with limited labeled data. Lastly, exam-
ining the impact of incorporating domain-specific knowledge,
such as expert heuristics or insights from materials science,
could further improve the method’s effectiveness in the man-
ufacturing domain.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Baraniuk, M. Davenport, R. DeVore, and M. Wakin, “A simple proof
of the restricted isometry property for random matrices,” Constructive
Approximation, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 253–263, Dec. 2008.
[2] L. S. Bastos and A. O’Hagan, “Diagnostics for Gaussian process
emulators,” Technometrics, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 425–438, Nov. 2009.
[3] M. J. Bayarri et al., “A framework for validation of computer models,”
Technometrics, vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 138–154, May 2007.
[4] A. Blum and S. Chawla, “Learning from labeled and unlabeled data
using graph mincuts,” Dept. Comput. Sci., Columbia Univ., New York,
NY, USA, 2001.
[5] R. Bruno. (Jan. 4, 2022). Tuffaloy Resistance Welding Products.
Accessed: Mar. 22, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.tuffaloy.com/
[6] R. Cang, H. Li, H. Yao, Y. Jiao, and Y. Ren, “Improving direct physical
properties prediction of heterogeneous materials from imaging data
via convolutional neural network and a morphology-aware generative
model,” Comput. Mater. Sci., vol. 150, pp. 212–221, Jul. 2018.
[7] P. Chakravarti, M. Kuusela, J. Lei, and L. Wasserman, “Model-
independent detection of new physics signals using interpretable
semi-supervised classifier tests,” 2021, arXiv:2102.07679.
[8] O. Chapelle, B. Schölkopf, and A. Zien, “A discussion of semi-
supervised learning and transduction,” in Semi-Supervised Learning.
Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2006, pp. 473–478.
[9] O. Chapelle and A. Zien, “Semi-supervised classification by low den-
sity separation,” in Proc. Int. Workshop Artif. Intell. Statist., 2005,
Paper R5:57-64.
[10] Y. Chen and J. Z. Wang, “Image categorization by learning and reasoning
with regions,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 5, pp. 913–939, Aug. 2004.
[11] Z. Chen, J. Gao, W. Wang, and Z. Yan, “Physics-informed gen-
erative
neural
network:
An
application
to
troposphere
tempera-
ture prediction,” Environ. Res. Lett., vol. 16, no. 6, Jun. 2021,
Art. no. 065003.
[12] Y. Cheng and L.-Y. Fu, “Nonlinear seismic inversion by physics-
informed Caianiello convolutional neural networks for overpressure
prediction of source rocks in the offshore Xihu depression, East China,”
J. Petroleum Sci. Eng., vol. 215, Aug. 2022, Art. no. 110654.
[13] M. Cranmer et al., “Discovering symbolic models from deep learning
with inductive biases,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 33,
2020, pp. 17429–17442.
[14] A. Daw, A. Karpatne, W. D. Watkins, J. S. Read, and V. Kumar,
“Physics-guided neural networks (PGNN): An application in lake tem-
perature modeling,” in Knowledge Guided Machine Learning. London,
U.K.: Chapman & Hall, 2022, pp. 353–372.
[15] A. Daw, R. Q. Thomas, C. C. Carey, J. S. Read, A. P. Appling, and
A. Karpatne, “Physics-guided architecture (PGA) of neural networks
for quantifying uncertainty in lake temperature modeling,” in Proc.
SIAM Int. Conf. Data Mining, 2020, pp. 532–540.
[16] T. G. Dietterich, R. H. Lathrop, and T. Lozano-Pérez, “Solving the
multiple instance problem with axis-parallel rectangles,” Artif. Intell.,
vol. 89, nos. 1–2, pp. 31–71, Jan. 1997.
[17] D. L. Donoho, “Compressed sensing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52,
no. 4, pp. 1289–1306, Apr. 2006.
[18] N. B. Erichson, M. Muehlebach, and M. W. Mahoney, “Physics-
informed autoencoders for Lyapunov-stable fluid flow prediction,” 2019,
arXiv:1905.10866.
[19] D. F. Alenezi, H. Shi, and J. Li, “A ranking-based weakly supervised
learning model for telemonitoring of Parkinson’s disease,” IISE Trans.
Healthcare Syst. Eng., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 322–336, Oct. 2022.
[20] A. B. Farimani, J. Gomes, and V. S. Pande, “Deep learning the physics
of transport phenomena,” 2017, arXiv:1709.02432.
[21] J. Foulds and E. Frank, “A review of multi-instance learning assump-
tions,” Knowl. Eng. Rev., vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 1–25, Mar. 2010.
[22] B. Frenay and M. Verleysen, “Classification in the presence of label
noise: A survey,” IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst., vol. 25, no. 5,
pp. 845–869, May 2014.
[23] A. Fujino, N. Ueda, and K. Saito, “A hybrid generative/discriminative
approach to semi-supervised classifier design,” in Proc. Nat. Conf. Artif.
Intell., vol. 20, no. 2, 2005, pp. 764–769.
[24] S. Greydanus, M. Dzamba, and J. Yosinski, “Hamiltonian neural net-
works,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 32, 2019.
[25] S. Guo et al., “Machine learning for metal additive manufacturing:
Towards a physics-informed data-driven paradigm,” J. Manuf. Syst.,
vol. 62, pp. 145–163, Jan. 2022.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenyang Institute of Automation. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 08:28:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


===== PAGE 14 =====
ALENEZI et al.: PHYSICS-INFORMED WEAKLY-SUPERVISED LEARNING FOR QUALITY PREDICTION
2019
[26] J. Herrero-Garcia, R. Patrick, and A. Scaffidi, “A semi-supervised
approach to dark matter searches in direct detection data with machine
learning,” J. Cosmology Astroparticle Phys., vol. 2022, no. 2, p. 39,
Feb. 2022.
[27] D. Higdon, M. Kennedy, J. C. Cavendish, J. A. Cafeo, and R. D. Ryne,
“Combining field data and computer simulations for calibration and pre-
diction,” SIAM J. Sci. Comput., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 448–466, Jan. 2004.
[28] C. J. Hillar and F. T. Sommer, “When can dictionary learning uniquely
recover sparse data from subsamples?” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61,
no. 11, pp. 6290–6297, Nov. 2015.
[29] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a neural
network,” 2015, arXiv:1503.02531.
[30] X. Jia et al., “Physics guided RNNs for modeling dynamical systems:
A case study in simulating lake temperature profiles,” in Proc. SIAM Int.
Conf. Data Mining, 2019, pp. 558–566.
[31] T. Joachims, “Transductive inference for text classification using support
vector machines,” in Proc. ICML, 1999, pp. 200–209.
[32] B. Kapusuzoglu and S. Mahadevan, “Physics-informed and hybrid
machine learning in additive manufacturing: Application to fused fil-
ament fabrication,” JOM, vol. 72, no. 12, pp. 4695–4705, Dec. 2020.
[33] G. E. Karniadakis, I. G. Kevrekidis, L. Lu, P. Perdikaris, S. Wang,
and L. Yang, “Physics-informed machine learning,” Nature Rev. Phys.,
vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 422–440, 2021.
[34] A. Karpatne et al., “Theory-guided data science: A new paradigm for
scientific discovery from data,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 29,
no. 10, pp. 2318–2331, Oct. 2017.
[35] M. C. Kennedy and A. O’Hagan, “Bayesian calibration of com-
puter models,” J. Roy. Stat. Soc. B, Stat. Methodol., vol. 63, no. 3,
pp. 425–464, Sep. 2001.
[36] S. Laine and T. Aila, “Temporal ensembling for semi-supervised learn-
ing,” 2016, arXiv:1610.02242.
[37] M. Leonesio and L. Fagiano, “A semi-supervised physics-informed clas-
sifier for centerless grinding operations,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Control
Technol. Appl. (CCTA), Aug. 2022, pp. 977–982.
[38] Y.-F. Li, I. W. Tsang, J. T. Kwok, and Z.-H. Zhou, “Convex and
scalable weakly labeled SVMs,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 14, no. 7,
pp. 2151–2188, 2013.
[39] M. Lutter, C. Ritter, and J. Peters, “Deep Lagrangian networks: Using
physics as model prior for deep learning,” 2019, arXiv:1907.04490.
[40] C. Meng, S. Seo, D. Cao, S. Griesemer, and Y. Liu, “When physics meets
machine learning: A survey of physics-informed machine learning,”
2022, arXiv:2203.16797.
[41] K. J. Montes, C. Rea, R. A. Tinguely, R. Sweeney, J. Zhu, and
R. S. Granetz, “A semi-supervised machine learning detector for physics
events in tokamak discharges,” Nucl. Fusion, vol. 61, no. 2, Feb. 2021,
Art. no. 026022.
[42] N. Muralidhar et al., “PhyNet: Physics guided neural networks for
particle drag force prediction in assembly,” in Proc. SIAM Int. Conf.
Data Mining, 2020, pp. 559–567.
[43] M. A. Nabian and H. Meidani, “Physics-driven regularization of
deep neural networks for enhanced engineering design and analysis,”
J. Comput. Inf. Sci. Eng., vol. 20, no. 1, Feb. 2020, Art. no. 011006.
[44] K. Nigam, A. K. McCallum, S. Thrun, and T. Mitchell, “Text classifica-
tion from labeled and unlabeled documents using EM,” Mach. Learn.,
vol. 39, pp. 103–134, May 2000.
[45] D. S. Oliver and M. Alfonzo, “Calibration of imperfect models to biased
observations,” Comput. Geosci., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 145–161, Feb. 2018.
[46] N. Parikh and S. Boyd, “Proximal algorithms,” Found. Trends Optim.,
vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 127–239, 2014.
[47] M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G. E. Karniadakis, “Physics-informed
neural networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward and
inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations,”
J. Comput. Phys., vol. 378, pp. 686–707, Feb. 2019.
[48] J. S. Read et al., “Process-guided deep learning predictions of lake
water temperature,” Water Resour. Res., vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 9173–9190,
Nov. 2019.
[49] J. Sacks, W. J. Welch, T. J. Mitchell, and H. P. Wynn, “Design and
analysis of computer experiments,” Stat. Sci., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 409–453,
Nov. 1989.
[50] B. Settles, “Active learning literature survey,” Dept. Comput. Sci., Univ.
Wisconsin, Madison, Spain, Tech. Rep. 1648, 2009.
[51] Q. Shi, D. Gu, M. Xia, S. Cao, and T. Rong, “Effects of laser processing
parameters on thermal behavior and melting/solidification mechanism
during selective laser melting of TiC/Inconel 718 composites,” Opt.
Laser Technol., vol. 84, pp. 9–22, Oct. 2016.
[52] Resistance Welding—Peel and Chisel Testing of Resistance Spot and
Projection Welds, ISO Standard 10447, Geneva, Switzerland, 2006.
[53] A. Tarvainen and H. Valpola, “Mean teachers are better role mod-
els: Weight-averaged consistency targets improve semi-supervised deep
learning results,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., vol. 30, 2017.
[54] V. Verma et al., “Interpolation consistency training for semi-supervised
learning,” Neural Netw., vol. 145, pp. 90–106, Jan. 2022.
[55] H. Wang, B. Li, and F.-Z. Xuan, “A dimensionally augmented and
physics-informed machine learning for quality prediction of additively
manufactured high-entropy alloy,” J. Mater. Process. Technol., vol. 307,
Sep. 2022, Art. no. 117637.
[56] B. Zhou, T. Pychynski, M. Reischl, and R. Mikut, “Comparison of
machine learning approaches for time-series-based quality monitoring
of resistance spot welding (RSW),” Arch. Data Sci. A, vol. 5, no. 1,
p. 13, 2018.
[57] Z.-H. Zhou, “A brief introduction to weakly supervised learning,” Nat.
Sci. Rev., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 44–53, Jan. 2018.
[58] Z.-H. Zhou and M. Li, “Semi-supervised regression with co-training,”
in Proc. IJCAI, 2005, pp. 908–913.
[59] Z.-H. Zhou and M. Li, “Semi-supervised learning by disagreement,”
Knowl. Inf. Syst., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 415–439, Sep. 2010.
Dhari F. Alenezi (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in industrial and
management systems engineering from Kuwait University, Kuwait, in 2016.
He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the H. Milton Stewart of
Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology. His
research interest focuses on applying weakly-supervised machine learning
techniques to enhance telehealth capabilities and optimize the quality of
manufacturing processes.
Michael Biehler (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in
industrial engineering and management from Karlsruhe Institute of Technol-
ogy (KIT) in 2017 and 2020, respectively. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D.
degree with the H. Milton Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineer-
ing, Georgia Institute of Technology. His research interests include interface
between machine learning and cyber physical (manufacturing) systems, where
he aims to develop methods for cyber security, monitoring, prognostics, and
control. He is a member of ASME, ENBIS, IISE, INFORMS, and SIAM.
Jianjun Shi received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in automation from Beijing
Institute of Technology in 1984 and 1987, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree
in mechanical engineering from the University of Michigan in 1992. Currently,
he is the Carolyn J. Stewart Chair and a Professor with the H. Milton
Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of
Technology. His research interests include the fusion of advanced statistical
and domain knowledge to develop methodologies for modeling, monitoring,
diagnosis, and control for complex manufacturing systems. He is a fellow
of the Institute of Industrial and Systems Engineers (IISE), the American
Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME), and the Institute for Operations
Research and the Management Sciences (INFORMS); an Elected Member
of the International Statistics Institute (ISI); a Life Member of ASA; an
Academician of the International Academy for Quality (IAQ); and a member
of the National Academy of Engineers (NAE).
Jing Li (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree from Tsinghua University,
Beijing, China, in 2000, and the M.A. degree in statistics and the Ph.D. degree
in industrial and operations engineering from the University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI, USA, in 2005 and 2007, respectively. She is currently the
Virginia C. and Joseph C. Mello Chair and a Professor with the H. Milton
Stewart School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA. Her research interests are statistical modeling
and machine learning for health and manufacturing applications. She is a
member of IISE and INFORMS. She was a recipient of NSF CAREER Award.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Shenyang Institute of Automation. Downloaded on July 09,2026 at 08:28:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
